here they come
good afternoon i'm very glad to be
joined today
and not just by patrick violence but by
the chancellor rishi sunak who is
going to tell us more in a moment about
our latest package to help this country
in its battle with kovid and i want to
thank rishi for
measures that will protect people's
livelihoods and protect
jobs and which will help us to deliver
our overwhelming
objective of getting the virus under
control
while keeping pupils in education and
keeping
the uk economy moving forward
i know that there are some people who
say this economic objective is so
important
that we should stop all measures to
control the virus and
stop restrictions of any kind on our
social lives
and on the way we run our businesses
we can't do that because alas the
maths is inescapable we would face many
thousands more deaths and no to answer
one commonly posed question
we would not be able to insulate the
elderly
and the vulnerable not in a society with
so many
multi-generational households no country
has been able to do that and an
uncontrolled expansion
in the number of covid patients would
mean
that the nhs would have even less
capacity
to treat heart patients and cancer
patients
and to deal with all our other medical
needs
so that's why we reject that extreme
laissez-faire approach and then there
are others who say
on the contrary that we need now to lock
the whole place down from
jonah groats to land's end turn the
lights out shut up
shop close schools and universities and
go back to the same kind of lockdown we
had
in march and april and may
and i have to say i don't believe that
is the right course
now not when the uh the psychological
cost of
lockdown is well known to us the
economic cost
and not when it's being suggested that
we might have to perform
the same sort of brutal lockdowns again
and again in the months ahead and
not when there is such an obvious
variation
unlike last time between different parts
of the country so
that's why we're going for a balanced
approach
a middle course between the the cilla
of another national lockdown and the
charybdis of
an uncontrolled virus a regional
and local approach the same approach
that is now being followed
by some of the countries that are most
successful
in their fights against the virus and
so to all those who are enduring these
restrictions and who have been enduring
them
for so long in all parts of the country
i want to repeat my thanks for your
bravery
for your patience and your public
spiritedness
and i i repeat there are clear signs
that our collective actions
are working yes the r the
reproduction rate of the virus is above
one
but thanks to the efforts of people
of all ages in following the guidance
and the rules
the r is about half its natural
rate and if we follow the guidance
together and follow the rules
then we can get it done and it's
precisely because these measures are
burdensome that from the beginning this
government has provided
unprecedented support to everyone in
this country
support worth 200 billion pounds to look
after jobs
and livelihoods and business
and as we adjust our campaign to fight
the virus
it's right that we should now produce a
new package
of support across the country in
addition
to the specific agreements we've reached
with lancashire
merseyside and others and
because it's far far better
to keep business going now rather than
to let those jobs go forever in a
a new national lockdown we will win
this fight against kovid because we can
see that treatments
are getting better and medicines are
getting better and testing technologies
are getting better and we've shown
before
that we can drive the r down and
in the meantime we need to protect jobs
protect livelihoods
and put the uk in the strongest position
for an economic recovery i'm going to
hand over now
to the chancellor rishi sunay thank you
prime minister good afternoon
our plan for jobs will support british
people
and businesses wherever they live and
whatever their situation
and just as we have throughout this
crisis we will listen
and respond to people's concerns as the
circumstances
evolve earlier today i announced three
new measures first i'm making our job
support scheme
more generous for employers who can open
safely
but whom are struggling with the impact
of restrictions on their business
instead of employees working at least a
third of their hours to qualify for
support
they will now have to work just one day
a week
and the government will significantly
increase the contribution it makes
towards people's wages with businesses
paying much less just five percent
toward the cost
of hours not worked this is one of the
most generous versions
of a short time work scheme in the world
it is better for business
better for jobs and better for the
economy
second we're doubling the value of the
self-employed income support grants
from 20 to 40 percent of average profits
meaning the maximum grant will increase
to 3
750 pounds and third
we're introducing a new grant scheme for
businesses in higher
alert level areas even if they can
remain open
businesses in sectors like hospitality
leisure and accommodation
will be able to apply to their local
authority for cash grants
of up to two thousand one hundred pounds
per month
and these grants will be backdated to
august
this means we're being more generous to
businesses and places
which have been in higher alert levels
for longer
this is our plan a plan for jobs
for businesses for the regions for our
economy
for the country a plan to support the
british people
thank you thanks very much rishi uh
patrick can we get to you for the
today's slides please just uh
update you on some of the numbers so
this is a slide that i showed last week
the new numbers come out tomorrow but
it's a reminder that the
number of people in the uk thought to
have
kovi based on the office for national
statistics
survey last week was somewhere between
and 362 000 people over that period
we're expecting the new numbers tomorrow
and and this will be higher
i'm sure so that we continue to see an
increase in the total number of people
with the virus next slide please
that's one thing the prevalence the
number of people with the infection at
any one time
the second is the incidence the number
of people with
a new infection every day and again
there are two numbers there which are
from last week which were the estimates
again looking back from two big studies
the react study in the o and s study
we get the updated o s data tomorrow but
the
modeling consensus suggests that between
53 and
90 000 new infections per day
may be occurring and obviously with that
number of infections
you expect to see an increase in
hospitalizations as well so the number
of infections
overall across the country continues to
increase
next slide please this shows the
hospital admissions the yellow bar
indicates from a month ago
and you can see an increase in the
number of patients admitted to hospital
every day with covid which is up towards
a thousand
now and with the numbers of infections
you'd expect that to continue to
increase and it's worth remembering
that the number of infections leads to
hospitalizations a week or two later
and that in turn has the effect of
increasing intensive care unit
numbers and of course unfortunately a
number of people will die as a result of
that and that will increase a week or
two after that so we expect to see a
delay
from the number of infections through to
hospitalizations
through to the very serious consequences
and to death
next slide please a number of patients
in hospital with covid
has increased again the yellow bar shows
from a month ago you can see the number
of patients across the uk
in hospital with covid and i just want
to make a point that the prime minister
has alluded to which is one of the
reasons that care for other conditions
like cardiovascular disease and oncology
cancer care gets affected is not the
measures taken to stop
covid it's the patients with codrid who
start to occupy bed so the more patients
there are with covid
the more the pressure on the healthcare
system overall and the more the other
conditions get affected because people
don't have
the capacity to deal with it so it's
very important to keep the numbers of
infections down
if we are to reduce the number of
hospitalizations
next slide please this is the r value
over time
from may through to now we're expecting
an updated value for this tomorrow
what you can see is r was very flat over
the period of the summer it was below
one
that means the epidemic is shrinking it
shrank over the period
up to august and then as measures were
released and people started to make more
contacts you can see that the r
increased and it's gone up to somewhere
between 1.2 to 1.5
something like that so it's about half
of the natural r which is around three
so it's definitely reflects the huge
effort that people have made
to try to adhere to the uh various
measures that are in place
the fact that we're wearing masks we're
keeping a distance we're washing our
hands we're doing the things that we
need to do
to try and reduce it has brought the r
down but this also means
that the epidemic is still growing as
long as r is above one
the epidemic continues to grow and it
will continue
to grow at a reasonable rate
it's doubling perhaps every 14 to 18
days
unless the r comes below one so that is
the aim and i do want to just say there
are some areas
where we begin to see real effects
of what's happening so there's some
indications that amongst young people
the rates are coming down or flattening
off a bit again
due to the huge efforts that people have
made to try to adhere to these
changes in behaviors that we need to
have in order to get this down
and in some areas of the country we can
begin to see a little bit of flattening
possibly
so the measures are having an effect but
we need to do
more if the aim is to get r below one
and to shrink
this epidemic i just want to show a
couple of slides now on
regional pictures next slide please this
is the
picture that we've shown before on the
left hand side the darker the purple the
higher the case numbers
what you can see is the entire
entirety of england is now purple so
that there are cases everywhere
increasing
and some areas have got very high
numbers
which if r stayed at one those would
stay
at very high numbers on the right hand
side
is the speed with which growth is
occurring
so where it's brown the numbers are
increasing and the darker the brown
the greater the increase so again in
some areas
this has slowed down a bit the rate of
growth
isn't as high as it was in some areas
but overall
this is growing continues to grow r is
above one
and therefore we should expect to see
greater numbers
next slide please this is the regional
breakdown in terms of hospital
admissions
and uh in keeping with the previous
slide what you can see is that the north
west northeast yorkshire midlands have
the highest number of people in hospital
again some possibility of of um
beginning to see a decrease in the rate
of increase due to the measures that
people are taking
and you can see london is increasing but
at the lower level southeast east of
england and the south west of the lowest
but still
increasing so the regional picture is
different the country is essentially in
in different
zones depending on the the speed of the
increase and the overall numbers but you
can see there are increases across the
country as a whole
thanks very very much patrick let's go
to questions from the
from the public yvonne from surrey first
of all
the question i'd like to ask is in the
event of a national or local lockdown
where specific businesses are ordered to
close what financial help will be
available
by the government to cover particularly
the cost of wages
to businesses who've not been
specifically told to close
but for whom there's no or limited
income because their clients or
customers
have been ordered to close and therefore
there's no work available
well thanks very much yvonne i'm gonna
uh ask rishi obviously to
to comment on on that as well but uh
we're doing everything we can to support
business throughout
uh this this crisis there are all sorts
of loans uh
available grants available 25k uh grants
have been made available there's
uh cuts in in vats is down to
uh to five percent i believe uh business
rates uh deferred
uh doing all sorts of things we can to
to support you and help you
uh yvonne but uh rishi uh anything uh
you'd like to
say to encourage you on yes um there's a
few things that we've already put in
place and a couple more things that we
announced today that i think will be
of help to people in this situation if
you're told specifically to close
then your business will be eligible the
business premises will be eligible for
grants of up to three thousand pounds
a month and that will last as long as
you have been told
to close and then for your staff the
wages of those staff will be paid by the
government
at two-thirds all the employer has to do
is just contribute to the national
insurance contributions
if they are owing a tour so that's
sensible and generous treatment for
people in those situations
for people who perhaps are suffering
from a supply chain as i think you're
talking about if you're involved in a
supply chain where businesses that you
supply are having a tough time
and that's having an impact on your
business i think a good example of that
is in tier two areas where some of the
restrictions
that we've got in place are having an
impact on businesses even though they
haven't been told to close but revenues
are down
whether that's hospitality or otherwise
we made two announcements today that
will help
businesses particularly in the
hospitality sector will be eligible
for grants worth 70 percent of the value
of the ones i mentioned earlier so that
will be up to 2100 pounds
per month a sum of that amount will be
made available to the local authority
for them to allocate at their discretion
so it may be that they choose to do
something slightly different with it
but we will size the value of the grants
for the number of hospitality leisure
and accommodation businesses
in a particular tier two area and again
those grants will be available
monthly and then secondly for the wages
of
people of the staff and those types of
businesses the newly
generous job support scheme i think will
really help so you will be able to
rather than let go of those employees
they can work on reduced hours down to
now just
one day a week so they have some work
that they can do and for the rest of the
time
those employees will be paid two-thirds
of their normal wage
the employer just needs to pay five
percent of that and the government
will pick up the rest of the bill so i
think that's
again as much support as we can provide
to help keep people
in work in businesses even though those
businesses are going through
a very tough time so hopefully as i said
those two things we announced today
coming on top of what we've already done
will make a real difference
thanks uh very much rishi and thanks
yvonne liam from
bradford asked what can and will you do
to encourage new and innovative business
to emerge at this time
a critical component of economic growth
which seems to have been
forgotten how can we share the risk um
well liam again i would say that
the uk is one of the most competitive
and dynamic uh environments to
uh to set up a business uh under any
circumstances
uh we have uh all sorts of advantages
but we now have
uh the advantages i said just now to
yvonne of
unprecedentedly low uh business rates uh
of vat uh we have a low corporation
tax uh and uh we we are
you know putting in fantastic
investments now in
a lot of the things that business will
need uh for uh for long-term growth
the investment in skills uh in
infrastructure in
uh gigabit broadband uh where we want to
be leading the world
giving uh startup businesses uh the
basic foundation
on on which to build uh but uh rishi
anything you'd like to add
to for liam i think liam you're
absolutely right we're very lucky in
this country to have
fabulous entrepreneurial startup
companies they will help drive our
recovery so they haven't been forgotten
i'd probably point you to one particular
intervention we made earlier on in the
crisis and that was to create something
called the future fund
you heard the prime minister talk about
the various loan grants and guarantees
that we've made available throughout the
crisis
now they worked quite well for
traditional businesses which had cash
flows and profits before
you know they weren't well suited to
startup businesses like the ones you're
describing
uh who were before that you know but
pre-revenue stage so what the future
fund did
is it shared the risk exactly as you
mentioned between the government
and investors and what we said is we
will match the investment that private
investors put into these start-up
companies whether that's in a series a
round or a seed round or an angel round
uh anywhere from a couple of hundred
thousand pounds all the way up to five
million
uh that fund has proved to be really
successful i think it's been warmly
welcomed by the startup and
entrepreneurial
community all across the country and
it's funded um just under a thousand
companies
uh so far and as you said i'm hopeful
that that will provide them with the
financing they need to survive through
the crisis
share the risk with the taxpayer but
then emerge stronger on the other side
and help
drive our growth and recovery brilliant
thanks
uh let's go to laura kuhnsburg at the
bbc thank you very much prime minister
and firstly president chancellor and the
problems with the first version of your
job scheme that you've rewritten today
were obvious to many people in industry
from the start
why do you keep underestimating the help
that people really
need and sir patrick can i ask you if
you agree
with scotland's chief medical officer
who's told families there's no question
of anything like a normal christmas and
they should plan to celebrate
digitally and prime minister to you this
week
you've been to war with leaders in the
north of england you're still
leaving some workers on two-thirds of
their wages or telling them to claim
benefits
and cases of coronavirus keep on rising
this is really the kind of leadership
you think the country deserves
laura i think it's a perfectly fair
question to ask about the timing of this
i think if you think back to the summer
when we designed the job support scheme
in conjunction with business and
business groups and unions
i think at that point we were looking
forward to the economy reopening
and restrictions being lifted now what
we've seen in the last
especially last four or five weeks as as
these new restrictions have been put in
place
the impact they're having on the ground
has been highly significant particularly
to businesses
in the hospitality sector particularly
in these tier uh two areas and it's the
cumulative weight of all these new
restrictions
has really if you speak to anyone in
this industry they're seeing it in their
numbers quite
um quite significantly over the past few
weeks and that's why
you know as we've always said we will
adapt and evolve our response as the
situation changes now as the health
restrictions have changed and that's had
an impact on the economy i think it's
right
that we respond pragmatically and
flexibly to that because ultimately what
we're trying to do
is protect people's jobs and income and
the measures that we've put in place
today
i'm confident will do just that and this
will be now in place
for a while to come and i think is very
generous and effective support
uh i think the numbers speak to
themselves they're increasing
and um they're not going to decrease
quickly and i think it's likely that
some
measures of restriction are going to
need to be in place for a while to try
and get
those numbers down obviously the quicker
you get the r below one
the quicker numbers come down and things
then give a bit of room
and so a lot depends on what happens now
over the next few weeks
at the moment the numbers are headed in
the wrong direction but as i say there
are some signs
in some places of a potential flattening
off of that and we need to wait and see
and monitor the numbers very very
carefully well
laura i'm afraid strongly reject what
you say about
me being at war with uh local leaders
that's that's not
not the case we've had great
conversations with
uh with uh local leaders mayors and
others in
uh liverpool in lancashire in in
yorkshire in the
in the in the west midlands south
yorkshire i should say
london and everybody has come to the
table
shown leadership stepped up to the plate
and
agreed to help bring the r down in that
particular area which is what we
we need to see i'm grateful also to andy
burnham uh
in uh greater manchester where uh where
he's agreed to help uh bring the yard
down with a package of measures in
in tier three and as as patrick has has
just said
thanks to the efforts of people across
the country
we are starting to see uh some
progress and it is early days yet and it
will be
tough but i really think that uh people
do
think across the country that this
balanced approach
avoiding another full-scale national
lockdown and avoiding letting the virus
rip is the
is the right way forward and that is
what we are
uh pursuing uh balanced middle course
relying on uh local cooperation and
laura
i must you know as i say i disagree
we've had uh fantastic and extensive
uh local uh cooperation and yes it's
tough
but we will certainly get through it
very well let's go to beth rigby of sky
news
thank you prime minister is the back
dated tier 2 business support today and
acknowledgement that you were not
supporting parts of the north of england
properly
for weeks during the summer andy
burnham's right isn't he
when he says that you have neglected the
north
and isn't this announcement today an
attempt to right
that wrong and sir patrick at a sage
meeting on may
the first uh the sage committee agreed
that at least 80 percent
of contacts would be needed in the test
and trace system
to make it effective the test and trace
scheme
is contacting less than 60 percent now
how disappointing is that and what are
the implications of it
in terms of tackling this disease
um beth no the the the issue uh
is really one of of a basic
fairness is between uh various parts of
the country that are
uh uh having to experience regional
restrictions that's what we were trying
to achieve in the uh in the last
10 days what we're doing what we're
doing now is
is bringing forward measures that are
designed to help
businesses that have you can't trade as
they normally
uh would uh and they're experiencing you
know a fallen income as
as rishi has said that's what we're
trying to do we're doing it and we're
doing it across the whole
country and it and it's it's it's
backdated uh as you know
uh to to august but uh rishi
i think i just echo what you said prime
minister beth
this is simply about fairness it's about
treating people the same
wherever they live and whatever their
situation all the interventions that
we've put in place
are there on a national basis and as
different parts of the country
experience
different restrictions at different
times our various
support measures whether it's grants for
businesses or the job support scheme
will be there to help them their
businesses support their wages
at whatever time that is but we approach
everything uh
from a position of wanting people to
have the equal support wherever they are
not just within england but in every
part of the united kingdom as well
thanks very much beth let's go to ben
kentish of lbc
oh sorry patrick yes um so on the on the
uh test and trace um it it's
undoubtedly the case that test trace and
isolation becomes much more difficult to
have an
impact once numbers are high so it's
much more effective when numbers are low
that's the first point
the second point is that i think the
testing system has ramped up the numbers
they're able to do quite effectively
but it's really important to concentrate
on numbers of contacts
isolation as quickly as you can and
getting things back as quickly as you
can ideally to get the whole process
done within 48 hours
and it's very clear there's room for
improvement on all of that and therefore
that will be diminishing the
effectiveness of this but the
effectiveness anyway
of test and trace is less when numbers
are high than it is when numbers are low
but thanks very much as ben kentish of
lbc
then you need to unmute or somebody
needs to unmute you
can you hear me now yes gotcha thank you
prime minister i wanted to follow up on
that issue actually because countries
like
south korea germany and taiwan have
shown that there is an alternative
to the sort of restrictions that much of
the uk is now under and that is a
functioning test and trace system
uh we're testing more people than ever
but clearly something's going wrong for
example
in june prime minister you said you
wanted a 100 of test results to be back
within 24 hours today the current figure
is just 15
so what do you think's gone wrong there
and when can you assure the british
public
that that system will be effective
enough to start to control the virus
as it has in other countries and just
very quickly for the chancellor
unprecedented times were in clearly
unprecedented spending
is needed to support people but with uk
debt hitting 2 trillion
the highest since the 1960s how long do
you believe that can go on for and how
concerned are you
about that figure well first of all
ben on your on your point about uh bad
nhs test and
trace uh look i you know i share
people's frustrations and
i understand uh totally why we do need
to see faster
turnaround times and uh uh we do need to
uh
do need to improve it we need to we need
to make sure that people who
uh do get a positive uh test uh
self-isolate that's that's the
absolutely crucial if this thing is is
going to work in the way that it that it
can
but i just would stress to you ben that
the the achievements of the testing
operation have been
uh colossal you know they have moved
from uh a capacity of
of i think uh three thousand uh two
thousand tests
uh per day uh to about three hundred
thousand now we were
we've tested uh 26 we've done 26 million
tests more than any other
uh country uh in in europe and they are
on track to reach
a capacity of 500 000 by
the end of this month um and and the
technology is improving the whole time
but the crucial thing to get nhs test
and trace to work
is that if you test positive then
you've got to to self-isolate and don't
forget that there's a
uh you know 500 pounds to help you uh
with the cost of that
uh but also 10 000 pound fine for for
not doing so the thing depends
on people self-isolating and breaking uh
the
the transmission it is helping a bit
already to
to break uh the transmission about a
million people uh
as i say have been have been a million
contacts have been
have been reached but uh there is more
that it can do
if everybody complies once they're
contacted by nhs tests and traits
ben you're right to highlight the
unprecedented increase in borrowing
that's happening
this year and the consequent rise in our
debt levels to close to 100
of debt to gdp and as you said those are
unprecedented numbers at unprecedented
times
now whilst it is right to act i think
with scale
during a crisis like this to try and
protect jobs and employment and
ultimately
that will protect our economy in the
long run it's also right that because of
those numbers that you highlighted
that we always have one eye on the
long-term public finances because we
want to make sure that we are careful
with that
it's clearly not sustainable to carry on
acting in this way
forever so as we continue intervening in
the economy
it's right that that is targeted and
effective
and done in a way that we won't always
be able to do absolutely everything that
everyone would like us to do and it's
because of that
that uh because of the things that you
highlighted that will be the case that
we've got to have one eye
on the long-term health of the economy
and public finances
and make sure that you know once we get
through this we can return those public
finances and the economy to a strong and
sustainable position uh thanks
very much rishi let's go to chris smith
of the times
uh thank you um chancellor firstly just
picking up on your
last point given that the government
strategy now is to suppress the virus
until a vaccine was found and
having accepted the need for more
support today and saying it will be in
place for a while to come can you
guarantee that this level of help
will continue to be available until a
vaccine is in widespread
use and then to prime minister and
patrick on test and trace against
patrick you said that it's more
effective when numbers are low and it's
diminishing effectiveness as cases rise
so have we now
missed our moment effectively for this
system to work is it salvageable our
case is now just
increasing too quickly to keep up
chris i mean i'll let the promise from
patrick comment on the vaccine and the
part that that plays or doesn't in the
the medium-term strategy
but what we wanted to do was give
businesses and employees
some certainty and ability to plan
through
you know what is clearly going to be a
difficult winter period so what we have
said is that the job support scheme
which
starts on november 1st when furlough
finishes will last for at least six
months so it will last through
to the spring there will be a review
point in the middle so we can have a
look at it and make sure that it's
working well
um but that that support in that in its
guys will be there
through this difficult period through to
the spring to give people that certainty
and because we know as a prime minister
said a while back this is something that
will be a fact of our lives
um for some months to come i think more
broadly
most of the economic interventions we've
made also now have that predictability
through to the spring whether it's the
business rates
holidays or the changes we've made some
of the loan programs or the vat cut for
hospitality
again all of that will provide cash
support to businesses and people
you know throughout this period but i'll
let the prime minister and patrick talk
about
the kind of medium-term outlook well i
just add
one obvious point um chris
to what rishi has just said and that's
you know clearly this is what we're
announcing today is billions more
going into to support the uh the uk
economy support jobs
and and livelihoods and that's right
it's far better to to do that and keep
uh the economy going because we're going
to have to pay this
money back and we want to be in a
position where
the uk economy where you know companies
are kept alive jobs
uh supported uh people's skills
are maintained their energies are
maintained
uh so that the uk can bounce back as
strongly as possible
uh once as you say uh we we get the
virus uh
back under control um and that's and
that's the
objective and uh you know i i think that
if you look at the
uh the way the science is changing and
you look at the
uh the the improvements in
uh in treatments in therapies
uh in drugs um look at the changes we're
seeing in
and the improvements in uh in you know
some some changes in in the mortality
rates
i i am confident that we will get
through this uh very well
in due course but for the moment uh and
improvements in testing technologies
uh as i said uh last week really
interesting improvements in testing
technologies
but for the moment we have to use uh the
same
tools that we've got which is uh the
social distancing
measures the uh all those all those uh
restrictions that
we put in place and we have to do that
at a local and a regional
level because that's the commonsensical
thing to do
and if we do it together in the way that
we can
and we follow the guidance together in
the disciplined way that we can
and by the way the way that people of
all age groups seem to be doing
across the country then you know we will
drive that r down
again and we will get it under control
and in the meantime we would have
supported
our businesses kept them alive kept jobs
uh
going and we'll be in a better position
to come out of it that's
that's what we're doing uh patrick on
vaccines i think you know things are
progressing well there are vaccines that
produce an immune response they're in
phase three clinical trials we should be
seeing some data readouts over the
course of this year
but i remain of the view that the
possibility of sort of wider spread use
of vaccines isn't going to be until
spring or so next
next year by the time we get enough
doses and enough
understanding of the outputs to to use
them now we may get a few doses this
side of christmas
maybe something could happen but i think
we should more realistically be looking
at spring and of course there are no
guarantees until
the studies have read out so we need to
be cautious and carry on
but there is a good progress in terms of
the vaccines um
in terms of test and trace the number of
cases
test and trace will work effectively
across parts of the uk where
cases are lower that's when it can work
most effectively
it has much less of an impact at the
areas where you've got very high
levels and that's why additional
measures are taken and that's why
additional
isolation measures having to take
difficult decisions around
premises that need to be shut and so on
that's why they need to be taken because
at that point you can't really control
it
any other way than by stopping contacts
and
stopping contacts in environments in
which transmission is most likely to
take place
and then what test and trace does above
that and isolate
is to try and remove from circulation as
far as you can those people who are
infectious
and as new testing methods come on on
train that may be more possible
more widely but at the moment it's very
difficult to remove everybody
who's infectious from a situation where
you've got high levels which is why it's
so important to get them down
and why it's so important to to
self-isolate if you
if you get a positive test because that
if that doesn't happen then
uh obviously tests that a lot of the
force of test and trace
uh is is lost uh let's go to richard
partington of the guardian
thank you very much um question for you
prime minister and the chancellor
um i wanted to ask why the government
was prepared to go to the wall
earlier this week over five million
pounds with andy burnham
when you were preparing to announce
billions of pounds
of more support today through this
expansion in the job support scheme
the chancellor and the community
secretary were pictured meeting
business leaders uh in london this
morning
and does this mean that london is of a
higher priority
than the north of england for the
government
and then a second if i may why wait so
long
to announce these major reversals in
policy
uh when business leaders will have been
making decisions about what to do when
the furlough scheme ends for several
months now
does this not have a detrimental effect
on employment
and should the government not have acted
quicker
i mean sorry uh richard i i think you
directed the question of both of us but
i'll
i'll i'll quickly say my my my bit look
this was the the negotiations between uh
regional
uh leaders between metro mayors was all
about fairness that's what that
uh discussion was about it was about
making sure that everybody got uh the
same package what we're trying to do now
is address a a national issue which is
that
uh obviously since the virus started to
come up again uh
there's been much more concern uh
particularly in amongst the business
uh community about the people's ability
to protect uh jobs and livelihoods
uh because of the effects of the of the
virus and as the
as the campaign adjusts the fight
against the virus
changes and obviously uh we change our
response that's that's only
that's only logical but but richie yes i
echo that prime minister i think when we
uh richard when we designed the job
support scheme together with businesses
that you mentioned about and unions it
was done
over the summer with a view to the
economy being open and restrictions
being lifted now obviously the last few
weeks
uh that has not been as we as those
businesses had expected those
restrictions were coming back they were
having a cumulative effect on the ground
particularly in tier two areas
particularly
in hospitality and that's been the
cumulative weight of the changes
and the impact more broadly on consumer
confidence that we've seen
and that's why we've been in discussions
to try and see what changes we could
make that would do what we want to do
which is to try and protect jobs
and employment at this difficult time
and regard to the
the meeting this morning you're right i
was meeting uh together with the
community secretary
with representatives from businesses
unions
and indeed um in particular the
hospitality sector
there were plenty of people on on zoom
as well indeed from
i remember from merseyside and north
yorkshire as well as other places around
the country so i wouldn't take
anything from the fact that the meeting
would happen to be held in london and
you're right that was held
in a restaurant that was close to the
public at the time and was used uh as a
meeting for us for frank amanca
and i think it's important that we
highlight the particular impact that
what's happening on the hospitality
sector and that's why we were there
to bring that uh issue to light that's
what we were discussing
how are these social restrictions having
an impact on hospitality businesses
like that across the country and how can
we adapt and evolve
our support to try and help those
businesses protect as many jobs
as people there are two million people
who work in that sector
i've said repeatedly that those people
typically are younger
women ethnic minorities on lower pay and
it is a matter of social justice that we
do what we can to try and protect as
many of those jobs
as possible thanks very much let's go
lastly to jane kirby of the press
association
jane you need to unmute unmute jane here
we go
sorry um so patrick just picking up on
what you were saying about vaccines
um if we get a decent level of rollout
by next spring
how soon after that can people expect to
stop having to social distance and wear
mass
or do you think that those measures are
going to be in place for much of the
rest of 2021
and prime minister if circuit breakers
in wales and northern ireland are shown
to be more effective than three-tier
restrictions uh which some of your own
advisors have said
are useless will you change your mind
battery joining up on vaccines well i'm
not going to speculate on how effective
the vaccines are going to be
we will see the readout from the
clinical trials over
the next months we'll see some i hope
within the next
couple of months we should start seeing
outcomes once we know how effective the
vaccines are
then and how applicable they are to
different groups then you can start
working out
how to use them best but you can't do
that until you've seen the results of
safety and efficacy
and when you see that you can then start
to judge what impact that's going to
have but clearly the aim of vaccination
is to try to take most of the load of
of the infection spread onto the vaccine
in order to be able to release other
measures and that's got to be
an aim that we would all wish for and
that's why
so many companies around the world are
working on vaccines and why there's been
such remarkable progress and
it is remarkable if you look at um
history up till now
vaccines have never been made in
anything like this time frame it's been
at least five years and so to be where
we are now is remarkable
uh thanks very much well i mean i i
really hope that we do make
uh progress with uh vaccines and i you
know i i
wonderful that patrick is uh is is so
optimistic if i can put it out that way
uh about them um you know i but we can't
gen in my view rely on that we've got to
keep going uh it may happen
uh we're working flat out to ensure that
it does uh but we we can't
just count on that uh and that's why we
have to
do all the other things that that we're
doing and
um you know you ask the the the same
question everybody really is asking
should we just go back into another
national uh lockdown
and then you know possibly have an
another one
after that and another one uh after that
and i think that that really would be
economically
uh socially uh psychologically really
very damaging and difficult for
for the country we all remember what it
was like in uh in march
and april uh there were lots of costs
particularly costs to
uh kids who are kept out of school uh
there's a big social injustice
uh there's a big there's damage to
people's uh mental health
uh it's it's to say nothing of the
economic uh consequences of that kind of
lockdown so
that that's not why we're going for that
that approach uh we do think that the
local measures
uh are right and i repeat my gratitude
to
local leadership uh across the country
uh
people who who've uh who are helping to
get the are down get the virus done
uh in their uh neighborhoods in their uh
amongst their electorates and and as
we've seen plenty
of of great local leadership and and
that's what we're going to
uh continue with we're going to continue
to to work with people across the
country but it depends on all of us the
it's down to all of us ready to uh to to
follow the guidance hands face
space do the we haven't said that yet
this press conference hands face
space do the essential stuff
that you know uh makes sense
take a test if you have symptoms
self-isolate if you're
contacted by by nhs test and trace
that's the way we can do it together we
can
get the r down keep kids in school keep
our schools
open and keep our economy moving
and bounce back more strongly and the
package that we've outlined today
is about doing just that keeping our
economy
moving keeping jobs supporting jobs
and livelihoods throughout the pandemic
thank you all very much thank you
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc
dot co dot uk forward slash news follow
the story for all the latest
with bbc news